Welcome back everyone.
In this lecture we're going to begin working with pan this data frames the pan this data frame is our
main tool for working with data throughout the course.
The data frame is simply multiple panels the series to happen to share the same index.
You can think of a data frame as being very similar to a spreadsheet or an excel file.
It's just a lot more powerful since you can leverage all your python knowledge and skills to work with
the panel's data frame.
Let's head to a Jupiter notebook and get started.
Here I am at the notebook and have already imported some pie.
As MP in Kansas as PD next I want to create two Python lists.
I'm going to create a list called columns and this will be the columns w x y and z and then I'll create
another list called index and this will be the first letters a b see DNA
one thing to notice here is that I have four columns or four items in this columns list and then five
actual rows or five items in this index.
We're gonna be using these to actually create a data frame.
The last we need is to actually create our data so we can actually use num PI for this.
I can say from num pi thought random import Rand.
I n t go ahead and run that cell.
And since we ran that cell in the very next one we should be able to then see the documentation string.
And basically what this does is it returns random integers space between the low number and the high
number.
And then you can actually specify a size.
So we've seen this before.
Not pi.
What we're gonna do is to make sure that we get the same numbers together.
I'm going to ask for data is equal to Rand I.A. numbers from negative one hundred to one hundred in
shape.
Five by four so five rows by four columns.
But if I just run this and then check for my data I don't get some random numbers.
And if you do the same thing your random numbers aren't gonna be the same as mine.
So make sure you can follow along.
Let's go ahead and set a seed in the exact same cell as we're calling random integer.
What we'll do is we'll say NDP random thought seed and then I'll set the seed to forty two and again
forty two is just an arbitrary choice.
Well you need to do is make sure that these two lines when the exact same cell when you run them that
way when you actually call the data you'll get these exact same numbers.
If you did not get these exact same numbers please go ahead and review our notebook or view this video
closely.
Next we want to show you how to actually create the pan this data frame.
So if we say PD dot data frame one thing to notice that sometimes confuses beginners is this EF is actually
capitalized.
So keep that in mind.
Next we'll go ahead and do shift tab to see the in its signature or the doc string.
You can see we have essentially three main parameters the data the index and the columns.
This is essentially append the series that happens add information with the columns.
So previously our series just took in data and some labeled index.
Now we have one more that we can take in which is columns.
So we'll go ahead and say passing our data our index in our columns run that.
And after you run data frame you should be able to see this nicely formatted data frame.
Keep in mind depending what version of Jupiter you're using the actual format display may be slightly
different but in the version of Jupiter that's providing the environment.
What happens is you get this nice little highlighting effect.
So I have this labeled index ABC the E.
Those are the actual row names.
And then the column names are w x y z.
So let's go ahead and review how to select an index essentially learn the various methods to grab data
from a data frame we can match and then when we are reading in data these rows are essentially going
to be data points and these columns will be features or labels.
So let's start with columns.
How do we grab a single column.
Well we can simply say IDF and then in square braces pass in the column name.
Note that this returns back a series essentially proving to us that a pan this data frame the columns
are all just pan the series.
That happened to share the same index values and we can confirm this by checking a type here and it
returns back that it's a series.
If I just check the type of f it returns back that it's a data frame.
And if you're able to understand that concept you're basically able to understand the main ideas behind
pandas is that we have this structure of series that we can join together by some common index to get
this nice data frame.
So in order to select just a single column we say the F and then in square braces or brackets we go
ahead and pass in the single column.
Now let's imagine I want to grab more than one column.
Well the way we do that is we actually pass in a list of column names so then we get these double bracket
notation.
And the reason is double bracket is because we're actually passing in the list the columns.
So let's imagine I want to columns w Enzi while I run this.
And now I get back a data frame since I've asked for more than one column.
So the double bracket notation is because I'm passing and a list of column names and it ought to be
in order.
I could say Z and then W. run it and I could get it back out of order so again data from columns are
just series.
Let's imagine I wanted to create a new column based off some old columns.
This is really common in what's known as feature engineering.
So we'll be seeing this a lot.
Well we can do is we call a column as if it already exists.
Keep in mind if I run this right now I'll get a type error or a key error basically saying hey I can't
actually find that new column because it doesn't exist yet but we're going to do is in to create a new
column.
We simply reference it as if it already exists and then give the formulation for what we want to construct
it based off the old columns.
And later on we'll see that we can assign this based off of other data frames and other data sources.
But for this one I'll say the f new is equal to DFW plus the F of Y.
So I run this and if I check out my data frame it has this new column which is simply the sum of the
W column and the Y column.
Now let's go ahead and show you how you can remove a column.
Sometimes we're gonna have features in our data that are not useful to us or just noisy or they're missing
too much data.
So we want to remove them the way we can do that is we say IDF dot drop and then we're gonna say the
name of the column we want to remove or we could pass in a list the columns we wanted to remove.
Now if I just say the F dropped new a common mistake that beginners do they just run this and they'll
get an error.
And the reason is because if we take a look at shift tab here axis equal to zero is the default access
for drop and X equal to zero actually refers to the rows.
So what we need to do is specify that I'm dropping this along axis is equal to 1 essentially meaning
look for the column label new not the index.
And then when I run this notice I no longer have this new column in my output here.
Keep in mind this is not an in-place dropping.
So if I called the F again it's actually still there.
So one way I can make sure this is permanent is I could reassign the f is equal to the F to drop new
axes equal to 1.
I run that and now when I called the F new is definitely no longer there.
That's a permanent change.
So go ahead and do this reassignment in case you want to have it in other way to do it is you can actually
specify in place is equal to true.
However you should keep in mind that future versions of pandas actually are going to remove this in-place
parameter.
So that's why we recommend doing this sort of reassignment.
OK.
So we learned how to select a single column how to select multiple columns how to create a new column
and how to remove a column.
Let's go ahead and see those same operations but for rows.
So let's imagine we try to select a row with the same methodology as selecting a column.
Well this is going to present some problems because pandas could technically have a row the same name
as a column.
So it didn't specify when we're dealing with rows how we're actually going to do this.
And there's two different methods for this.
One is to use the dot L O C dot LSC is basically going to tell pandas Hey I'm looking for a row here
and then you can pass in the name of the row such as Dot LCA and notice it's going to return back.
This first row as a series.
So it's interesting to note here is that not only are the columns pinned the series but the rows themselves
are pan the series and just like passing in multiple columns we can pass in multiple rows.
So we pass on a list of rows if I want multiple rows back.
For example if I want rows and e I just pass in that list of rows and I get back A and E..
Now as you mentioned back where we talk about pan the series the series still actually remembers the
integer index location.
The way I can grab things by an index integer based location is by saying the F thought I L O C and
here I can do slicing notation or just indexing with a single number so that I LFC says go ahead and
use the integer.
So this will return back the very first row.
If I were to do something like negative 1 that should return back the very last row.
In this case it's E or I can then use something like slice notation saying something like starting at
zero go all the way up to but not including row three.
So I run that and I get back indices 0 1 and 2 so all the way up to and not including three to the exact
same slice notation that a normal Python List uses next.
We can also drop rows by name so I can simply say def thought drop C in this case I actually don't need
to specify x equals zero because by default access is equal to zero.
Again note this is not a current place.
So if I called the F C is still there I would need to reassign this in order to actually make this happen
in place.
Finally I want to show you how to select a subset of rows and columns at the same time.
Let's imagine I want to add rows A and C but I only wanted the values for columns w and y for this.
Well the way this works is I simply say def dot l O.C. And then what I can do here is I can say something
like grab me row a comma for column W and I will giving back the value to this should look really similar
to the same logic we used with NUM pi.
Now what it could do is expand on this to then actually pass in a list of rows such as a let's go ahead
and say See we run that and then we get back the values here which actually happened to coincide.
These were both two and then I can expand on this to get back multiple columns.
So just keep in mind that your brackets here should be balanced.
Let's go out and ask for a W asks me y and the will you.
And then we get back this result.
So this is using dot l O.S. except now we can pass in not just rows but also columns as well to get
subsets of the data frame we're going to end this lecture here and in the next lecture will cover a
little bit more about some index details and then we'll cover also conditional selection which is probably
one of the most important topics we're going to cover throughout this pandas section of the course.
So definitely check out Part 2 in the very next lecture.
We'll continue right where we left off.
I'll see you there.